---
layout: post
title:Ruby on Rails: Beginners Best Friend
---

Learning to code is not easy. Like most things that are worth doing, it takes significant time, effort and suffering  to achieve a very basic level of competency. The biggest barrier I found in teaching myself was my own frustration and lack of progress. I have been doing this a little longer than a year, and it is interesting for me to look back on my progress. Early on there were some very basic problems that took weeks to figure out. It took me a while to come to terms with the fact that there was no easy way to do it. 

I tried out a bit of php and python/django before jumping into Ruby on Rails. For someone in a position similar to me, I would highly recommend leaning Ruby on Rails if you are starting frmo scratch When I began I knew nothing, but I knew I was interested in buiding web based technology(like everyone else!). Rails made my life a <i>little</i> bit easier for the following reasons:
	
	1) Scaffolding - I imagine it is rarely used by those who know what they are doing, I rarely use it now and still don't know what I am doing:), but scaffolding early on alowed me to experiment and learn code that already existed. Installing rails was pretty easy on ubuntu, and then all I had to do was run rails g scaffold Post name:string and I had a webapp! From there I had a framework in which I could learn the CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Destory) processes very quickly. 

	2) Convention over Configuration - Looking back now, I realize I spent <i>very</i> little time actually leaning Ruby, almost all my effort was put into learning html/css/JS/rails routes/MVC relationships/ and  configuring gems that handled the Ruby for me. This allowed me to build a site that *looked* like something I wouldn't be embarrased to show to friends. That was huge for me at the time.

	3) Documentation - Even now when I read python or django documentation for some projects I work on, it overwhelms me. The documentation at <a href="rubyonrails.org">rubyonrails.org</a> is <u>so</u> easy to follow along with. Again from someone who has no formal or informal background in development, something like this can make a huge decision when fighting against your own frustration to give up.

	4)Railscasts - Not even sure what can be said about this. I used to be cool but now I spend Saturday nights watching them. Thank you Ryan Bates. Watching <a href="http://railscasts.org">Railscast</a> videos are inspiring because Ryan has such a fantastic way of teaching. Every step is covered and so long as you have Ruby installed and bundler set up correctly - you can have prety much no idea what you are doing and recreate most of what is covered. 

Rails is awesome, the community, the documentation, everything. The only caution I would say is that it is very easy to get caught up with the "features" and ignore what is really important, learning Ruby. I have spent a lot of time the past few months playing catch up geting a better understanding of the Ruby language. In order to make significant progress moving forward, this is going to need to be ongoing for me. 

If I could do it over again, I think I would learn the same way because progress early on is crucial to sticking with it. For people who have jobs, it is REALLY hard to find the time and concentration to get started. For the first 7 months for me, my scheudle was get home at 7pm and sit at the computer until midnight, then wake up at 6:15 to go to work. It sucked at the time, so it would have been easy to quit if I wasn't seeing constant improvement. Totally worth it though. 

Ive written (and thrown out) a lot of code in the past 6 months, but most recently working with a few friends from college, I helped build <a href="http://dudedeal.com">Dudedeal.com</a> which is a resource for guys looking for relevant daily deals. We have the site built and currently are encouraging beta users to test it out. The deals are limited for right now, but we will be turning up the volume in the couple of weeks!


<a href="http://twitter.com/jamesjohnsona">Following or @ me on Twitter if you have any questions or comments!</a>


